Welcome back.
Let's talk about the different types that we have in JavaScript.
And luckily for us there aren't that many.
There's only seven of them.
We have numbers like five.
We have billions like true false.
We have strings like to be or not to be.
We have undefined which we've talked about.
We also have something called null.
We have another special one that came with yes six which is symbol.
And in here for now let's just say just me.
And then finally we have objects one two three four five six seven and you're looking at the list and
thinking Andre I think you've missed a bunch of others.
Where are arrays or functions.
Well before I get into that.
Luckily for us JavaScript has an operator called type of that tells us the type of an item.
So let me comment this out and find out what the type of five is.
It's a number.
All right.
That makes sense.
What about type of true around this.
It's boolean.
All right.
So far so good.
Nice and easy.
What if I do type of To Be or Not to be.
That's a string.
Easy peasy.
What about type of undefined.
Well that's undefined.
It's a special value in javascript on defined.
What about type of No.
Well what just happened here.
Noel is an object.
What.
This is something that we're going to talk about a little bit more when we get into the object oriented
programming part of the course.
But this is actually a mistake I'm not making this up.
It's true.
Even the creator of the language Brendan Eich who created javascript acknowledged it.
Remember no programming language is perfect.
We all write programs that well can never be bug free.
And this is one of those cases that this should be not right.
It's an actual type in JavaScript.
It's a what we call a primitive type but when we run the type of no operator we get object.
There was actually a proposal to fix this but because there's so much legacy code that depends on this
type of know being object that well they couldn't really change it because they'll break a lot of programs.
So for now we're stuck with that.
And trust me there's a lot more we are things like that in javascript.
So let's get over to the next one.
Let's look at type of symbol if I hit run.
It's a symbol now a symbol like I said is new in E6 and it creates something unique for us.
That is a symbol value.
In this case just me is useful for identifying an object so symbols are usually used for object properties
so that the objects property is unique.
We're not going to concern ourselves too much with this.
You can read up on it if you want but it's just a new type that we have that allow us to do some interesting
things with object properties.
All right.
Last one type of actually before we get to type of.
Let's go back here undefined and no.
What are the differences between the two.
Well undefined is the absence of a definition.
So it's used as the default value when the JavaScript engine initialize is our variables.
Right.
Remember our talk about hoisting what we use undefined for anything like that or even cases where let's
say functions return undefined when they don't return anything there's no return keyword in a function
or there's missing properties of an object undefined simply means well there's a variable there but
there's nothing there.
No.
On the other hand is the absence of value.
It means there's no value there.
I know that distinction is a little bit hard to get remember undefined is the absence of definition
null is an absence of value.
There is no value there.
And this is something we'll get into a little bit later on in the course.
All right.
Where are we.
Back to objects.
If I do typeof here and I hit run it's an object nice.
That makes sense.
OK.
So where are the race.
Let's have a look.
If I do type of array that's an object.
OK.
What about type of let's say a function like this.
If I run this that's a function well.
So Andre did you just teach us something completely wrong.
There's clearly a type of function in javascript right.
Well technically no.
And for now I need you to trust me on something.
I need you to trust me that this diagram makes sense.
That is arrays and functions are objects.
That's something that we're gonna get back and do later on in the course.
And we're really going to define what this means.
But for now just remember functions and Arrays are objects.
And even though type of function gives us a function underneath the hood a function in javascript is
just an object.
All right.
Still don't trust me.
What if I just do something like this by comment on this code and I create a function.
Function a and in here I'll say return 5.
The simple function but now can I do something like this.
Can I add a property to a function just like I can with an object with a dot notation if what I told
you is correct and functions are just simply objects that should make sense right.
This should work well let's find out.
Let's console log a dot.
Hi.
If I run this all right it's working.
So this is something we'll come back to but for now at least maybe 80 percent.
You're convinced that functions are objects but let's get back to what we're talking about.
We have the type of operator here that tells us what type something is and in JavaScript.
We have two distinctions.
We have the primitive types which are right over here and then we have the non primitive types.
Now what's the difference between the two in JavaScript all types other than the object type are all
primitives.
So what is a primitive type.
It's a data that only represents a single value so that means this primitive five well in memory the
value is five in memory.
The value is true in memory.
The value is this piece of string undefined null symbol.
There's no ambiguity about it a variable of a primitive type directly contains the value of that type.
Think of it this way.
They're kind of like atoms where they can't really be broken down into any smaller parts.
5 is just 5 in memory.
Null is just null and memory symbol just me is just a symbol that has just me in memory a non primitive
type doesn't contain the actual value directly.
What does that mean.
Well if I do something like an object that equals let's say an object that has property a equal to Tom.
This object doesn't actually contain the value here directly.
Instead it has a reference similar to a pointer to somewhere a memory that the object is health.
Now I know that's still a little bit hard to grasp and we're gonna have a video coming up on pass by
reference versus pass by value where we discuss the difference here a little bit more but before we
get into that video I want to finish off with one last thing.
That is the idea of JavaScript built in objects and you can see some of the built in objects here.
Now when I say built in objects I don't mean global objects like we saw when we added things to the
window object.
No standard built in objects come with the language.
It's part of the language.
And if I scroll through here we see some familiar ones like infinity not a number on defined.
If we keep scrolling we see error we see symbol.
We see no math date and I'll link to this MDMA page so you can take a look for yourself.
These are built in objects that come with javascript but you might be asking yourself why do we have
things like well boolean.
Why do we have things like No.
What do we have.
Things like string.
Do we just say that those are primitives those aren't objects.
Right.
Well you may have heard the term everything in Javascript is an object.
And bear with me here.
This gets a little tricky.
Many things that we interact with directly in JavaScript such just strings numbers ebullience which
are primitive and not objects get a little bit complicated by the fact that these primitives have object
wrappers like string or number or bullying.
Let me demonstrate for you what these two for example if I do true here and I do two string and I run
this I get true in string for why is that.
This is a primitive type.
Why is it acting like an object by using Don notation and doing to string.
You see this is where javascript gets a little sneaky it silently creates a wrapper object around this
true.
Something like this when we try and attempt to access a property on a primitive.
So behind the scenes it's almost like it's wrapping this in boolean so that it has access to two string
and then finally returns true super confusing I know.
So keep in mind that things like boolean or let's say string.
For example exist in order in order for us to be able to use some methods on these primitive values.
So no not everything in Javascript is an object but there are a lot of object or built in objects that
we can use so that if we do type of math for example that's an object if we do type of infinity in JavaScript
that's a number like I said types in JavaScript can get a little bit tricky.
And most of the time you don't really need to concern yourself with the inner workings of these things.
Try not to confuse yourself too much with but I think we still need to work on this idea of objects
primitive types are simple types like no strings bullets.
Right.
But objects those are still a little bit confusing.
So in the next video let's work a little bit more on this.